Lyssa and the Caterpillar
By Rosana Butler
 
Many people believe that the full moon affects people’s behavior, although there is no scientific proof to support this legend. Even in today’s age it is not uncommon  to hear the popular phrase “there must be a full moon out there.” It is nothing new that since ancient times civilization associates odd and insane behavior with the full moon, this includes suicide, increased violence, werewolf transformation, and increased illegal activity. In fact, the word “lunacy or lunatic” is derived from Luna the Roman goddess.
In this particular chapter, the full moon was shining and the stars were fully visible in the in the evening sky and I was irritable for no apparent reason. It wasn’t that time of the month for me, and I shouldn’t be having PMS.
I heard that Dr. Lenus had a new girlfriend… one of his oddities, but that didn’t matter to me, I was in love with someone else. Then what was making me so irritable? I could see the moon rising behind the mountains from the kitchen window. I love the view the Lone Peak Ward offers from almost every window. Up to now it had been a normal shift in the Psychiatric Ward where I had worked in for so many years, and I hoped it would continue this way until the end of my shift.
 
My stomach was rumbling, and I knew that Bakis was still around  the hospital campus. “Maybe he will stop by with pizza”, I thought. Bakis knows that pizza is my favorite food.
Bakis is the Consumer Advocate for the whole psychiatric facility, and is the mediator for all clients. He works regular hours and is loved by everyone who knows him. I’m lucky enough to be his wife.
From the end of the long hallway I saw Lyssa coming towards me, and she seemed to be in distress.
“Isabela, I am so mad!”
“Why Lyssa?”
“I just found out that my boyfriend is cheating on me!”
Lyssa has been with us for drug addiction treatment. Her drug of choice, meth. She can’t see how her choices has been decimating her.
The destroying effects of meth on Lyssa’s brain and body were already very evident, her hallucinations were more frequent and her physical appearance had greatly deteriorated since I had first met this beautiful young woman. The first time I met Lyssa Rees, she had a beautiful smile, clear skin, and a healthy body weight. Now most of her teeth were decayed, her skin had evident scars, and her body weight was below the ideal weight for a woman of her height.
“Who told you that Lyssa? Are you sure? Don’t jump to conclusions?”
“Yes Isabela, I am sure. The caterpillar by the window in my room told me everything!” She folded her arms and stamped her feet on the ground.
“CATERPILLAR? What are you talking about Lyssa?”
“There is a caterpillar right outside my window and she talks to me. She tells me everything that my boyfriend is up to.”
I looked straight into the blue eyes of this once beautiful, blonde, 5’6” woman standing in front of me, and said:
“Lyssa, caterpillars don’t talk. They don’t communicate. You are hallucinating.”
With tears in her eyes, trembling voice, and almost a whisper Lyssa said:
“Isabela, how could you? I trusted you!”
She stormed out crying and went to her room.
Lyssa is a 28 years old Caucasian native of Southern Utah. She started substance abuse in her early teens. This is her second time with us and  has a special place in my heart for her.
 
Methamphetamine abuse can produce devastating effects in the brain and body. Among other things, it can cause severe anxiety, violent behavior, hallucinations, paranoia, and confusion.
As Lyssa  suffered from schizophrenia, substance abuse was one of the ways she coped with her illness, despite our attempts to educate her about the dangers of illegal drugs.
 
I went straight to Eros, the RN, and told him about my encounter with Lyssa.
Eros was at his computer writing notes. He had a picture of his wife and son taped on the bulletin board right in front of him, it probably helped to keep him sane while working in such a stressful environment. He was in his late thirties, and was extremely good looking. His mother probably thought he would be as handsome as a Greek god to give him such a name.
“Eros, sorry to interrupt you, but Lyssa is really upset. She told me there is a caterpillar by her window, and it has been talking with her and telling her what her boyfriend has been up to. According to the caterpillar, the boyfriend is cheating on her and Lyssa is really upset.”
Eros shook his head with pity in his eyes, and asked me to go with him to Lyssa’s room  so he could evaluate her mental state.  
The hallway where Lyssa’s room was located was slighted curved. She resided in a room by herself, near the end of the hall. Her door was adorned with a wreath made out of paper leaves and birds that the recreational therapists had helped her make. She usually leaves the lights on because she is afraid of the dark. The wall by the side of her bed was covered with cards her boyfriend had sent her while she was staying with us.  
We found Lyssa in her room, laying on her bed, crying.
At the moment, she saw us she became angry, as she was feeling betrayed by me.
 Eros approached her saying “Lyssa”,. “Isabela tells me that you have been taking with a caterpillar. Is that true?”
“Yes.” She said sobbing.
“You know that caterpillars don’t talk, right?”
“This one does!” Lyssa had completely lost her mind.
“Lyssa, would you take a prn (a medication  given to a patient per nurse’s discretion) to help you with the hallucinations and voices? The doctor has already ordered prn’s for you as you need.”
“No, I’m fine.”
“Okay, but if you change your mind let me know.”
Eros and I walked out of Lyssa’s room concerned with her hallucinations, but he would not force her to take anything unless she became dangerous to herself.
“Eros, do you think Lyssa will be okay? She is acting so bizarre.”
“Let’s  keep an eye on her for now, Isabela. I want you to instruct the techs to check on her q15 minutes”, (every fifteen minutes).
“Right on.”
“I’m going to call Dr. Janus and tell him of this new development in her hallucinations. I believe he is still in his office.”
Dr. Janus  our psychiatrist, is a workaholic who spends more time in his office than at home.
I was feeling very concerned for Lyssa. I could tell that she was extremely delusional, yet it wasn’t my place to diagnose patients.
 
I had barely finished promising Eros that I would let the other techs know about Lyssa when we heard loud yelling, laughing, and high pitch sounds.
Leticia was running like a wild thing, butt naked, down the hallway. This is one of her favorite things to do. With arms swinging up and down she was playing catch me if you can, but none of the male techs wanted to jump in and stop her as none  felt comfortable laying hands on a naked female client. This almost four hundred pound, thirty years old naked woman was going to be quite difficult to stop but it was up to Greta and me to convince Leticia to get dressed,not an easy task.
Greta Ashborn, blonde and gorgeous, the only other female tech in the Lone Peak Ward, during the swing shift, and only twenty years old, and one of the best psych techs I ever worked with, came to our rescue.
“Leticia, honey you can’t be running around undressed! Let’s go put some clothes on, okay?”
Almost unable to breathe by now, Leticia went right to the dayroom and sat down on the first chair available.
“I’ll rest right here.” Pouting like a child, Leticia refused to move. Leticia was a married woman with children. I never did understand her diagnosis.
“Nope, you have to go to your room. You can’t be out here naked” I stated.
“But, I am tired”
Greta and I exchanged looks wondering how we were going to get Leticia into her room.
“You should have thought of that before taking your clothes off. C’mon Leticia, get up!” Greta didn't sound like she was in the mood for Leticia’s games.
“No, I’m staying right here!!!”
While all this was going on, the male techs were watching the scene without any pity for Greta and me, then another client came by the desk and said that she was having an “aura”.
 
There are some myths and truths about epilepsy and seizures. In some cultures,
 there is a belief that seizures are spirituality related instead of being a medical condition. This is absolutely not true. There are some who believe that epilepsy is contagious, another falsehood. Some believe it affects the intelligence of the individual with the seizure disorder but again, it has nothing to do with the person’s IQ. Others think that the individual can swallow his/her tongue during a seizure, this is a reason to laugh. Can you imagine that some people actually believe that seizures are voluntary?
The truth is that seizures and epilepsy are brain disorders that can only be diagnosed by a professional healthcare physician. There are several reasons why an individual may have a seizure, and there are many different types of seizures, but only a professional can make a diagnosis after the appropriate tests and exams have been administered.
 
When Felicia said, “I’m having an aura”, Edson Fotilas, another psych tech, immediately walked her to a chair where she could be safe. Eros was informed of Felicia’s condition and started taking her vital signs.
Greta and I, quickly helped Edson, who was trying to take care of Felicia who was having a seizure. This had attracted the concern of her peers. All the while Greta and I were attempting to have the naked woman return into her room.
We all knew about Felicia’s history of seizure disorder and what precautions to take.
Within minutes Felicia started having a seizure. Chairs were moved out of the way clearing space for her. Patients were sent to other areas for her privacy.
All the while, Leticia continued to refuse to go to her room and put on her clothes.
The grand mal seizure lasted longer than we expected and a code blue and paramedics were called.
The paramedics arrived within minutes from the time we called them. Having paramedics in the ward off times triggers agitation in many of our clients. Maybe they have had bad experiences in the past involving paramedics, or maybe the commotion feels like pandemonium to them.  
 
Felicia had to be transported to the ER because she became unresponsive. This was very unusual so our facility required a staff member to ride in the ambulance with her. We decided that Greta would be with Felicia at the ER. Felicia was known for epilepsy, but she was usually treated by us.
Finally, Leticia agreed to put clothes on. By now all the clients were a little bit edgy. I looked at my watch and it was only 7pm, 11 o’clock would not come fast enough.
 
While all this was going on,Scott, a client who has been diagnosed with paranoid schizophrenia and is not happy to be with us and has a self-destructive behavior of throwing himself headfirst against the locked doors had been at it again.  He had acquired large bumps on his head and  I feared that he was going to crack it open. It usually took several of us to stop him from hitting his head against the door so Eros had given him an injection of Haldol, but it had not helped. 

Scott  has a history of substance abuse. It has never become completely clear in my mind why people who suffer with severe mental illness have a tendency to abuse substance.I clearly remember chatting with Scott on one occasion, and listening to him tell me how he hopes one day to have inner peace, to find a special someone and have a family, yet this vies with his illegal drug use and his battle of the voices in his head. Despite all of our efforts to stop Scott from running into the exit doors, he would not stop. It breaks my heart to see a man who at one point in his life earned a degree from a prestigious university, so tormented.
Security officers were called and Scott was placed in four points restraints for his own safety otherwise he would have his brains falling out of his head.
.
Meanwhile, Thalia Ford, an older client decided to be creative in the bathroom, painting the walls with her own excrement. She is only in her fifties, but is obviously showing signs of Dementia and Alzheimer’s. I love her gray hair, but today she isn’t one of my favorites.
The foul smell made it unbreathable and unpleasant throughout the whole ward.
 
It was a nightmare.
 
Placing a client in four points restraints is one of the most traumatizing events my job requires. It’s traumatizing for the clients and for us. It is like being in a small arena, in a personal space with a friend who perceives us as the enemy. The client will fight with all their might to fend for them self. Every time I have to participate in such an event, “barbaric event” are the words I use to describe my feelings afterwards.
 
I can’t fathom what goes on the mind of a human being strapped to a bed, completely immobilized, at the mercy of the ones who profess to be doing everything in their power to protect them. The only consoling thought is that four points restraints are the last resort to protect someone from self-harm. As barbaric as it is, it can keep  severely mentally ill individuals from cracking their heads open, or doing even worse things.
As we strapped each of Scott’s limbs, and I heard the metallic sound of each of locks indicating he was secure… right arm, strapped… click sound, locked… left arm, strapped, click sound... locked… each leg… click sounds, strapped and locked… my heart now was strapped and locked. There was no joy.  
 
His cries, after he was placed in four points, were heard everywhere inside the ward and even outside. It was horrific. The torment he was going through was heartfelt by all of us. I felt like a barbarian in an ancient world without technology nor resources,  helping to place him in four point restraints.
 
Now, at our unit, we felt extremely short staffed because we were in fact short staffed. Greta had gone to the ER with Felicia, and Edson was sitting with Scott while he was in restraints, I was helping to clean up the mess Thalia had made in the bathroom all the time gagging at the putrid smell. Fetu was getting the evening snacks ready for the clients, while the whole ward could hear Scott wailing from the four points bed.
 
It has to be the full moon!
I was finally done cleaning up the bathroom, but the foul smell was now stuck in my nose forever, I checked my watch and it was 9:20pm.
 
I was feeling starved and knew that a break was not going to be possible.
 
Leticia once again came out of the bedroom butt naked, and Greta was gone. Who was going to help me this time? Everyone was extremely busy. Without hesitation, I went to Eros.
“Please help, I can’t deal with Leticia on my own.”
Eros looked at me shaking his head. “What now?”
It might have sounded like I was whining, but it all seemed too much.
“Leticia, she is naked, in the day room, refusing to put clothes on.”
With his calm, yet assuring tone of voice, he winked at me and said: “let’s do this together.”
Eros, is about 6’4” tall, in his late thirties, but takes good care of himself. You just need to look at him once to be certain that the probability of  goes his gym attendance was regular basis.
Eros approached Leticia and she could tell that he was not going to play games.
“Leticia, here are your options, you either go to your room on your own, put on some clothes, or I am going to call security and give you a shot, and have them put you in seclusion. You can’t be out in the common area naked. Make your choice, but make sure it's a good one.”
Leticia looked at Eros considered her options, and  knew that Eros was fed up with her. It was no time for a power struggle.
“Are you bullying me?”
Leticia dared to talk back to Eros.
“Isabela, call security. “
Eros sounded so determined that even I was surprised. Eros wasn’t putting up with any of Leticia’s games, and it was visible on his face.
“Fine!” She said angrily. She got up and went to her room.
 
Dr. Janus came to the unit to check on Scott since he was on four points restraints, and walking right by him was Dr. Lenus.
While Dr. Janus was in his mid-forties, salt and pepper type of hair, Dr. Lenus is blonde, blue eyes, also mid-forties but no sign of gray hair. They are both good looking doctors, and both very knowledgeable.
Dr. Lenus, is tall, has perfect skin complexion, and always speaks with a mellow tone of voice.  
“How is the unit tonight Isabela?” Dr. Lenus stopped by me, and with his mellow voice decided that it was a good time to chat.
“Well it’s full moon, you know…”
“Oh please, don’t you tell me that you believe in this urban legend.” He rolled his eyes.
“Oh please, don’t you tell me that you can’t tell the difference. ”I rolled my eyes and walked away.
 
I checked my watch again, 9:45pm.
 
In the midst of the chaotic night Eros asked me to go check up on Lyssa.
Oh, my gosh, I had totally forgotten to tell the techs to check Lyssa q 15 minutes as she had been talking and listening to caterpillars…
I walked to Lyssa’s room certain that by now she should be asleep.
Her room was dark and quiet. “She is asleep”, I thought.
I didn’t want to disturb her, but needed to make sure she was okay. With a whispering voice, I said:
“Lyssa, are you alright?” But there was no answer.
I remembered when I was a teenager  my mom would stand by my bedroom door staring at me, making sure I was well, while I pretended to be asleep. However, it was my job to make sure this client was in fact well. My gut instinct told me to approach Lyssa’s bed and check her respiration. One of these prompts that you don’t know where it’s coming from. Maybe it was my mind, maybe it was the urban legend in my mind of the full moon, or just that I cared enough for our clients to be daring enough to disturb them while they are asleep.
She had her blanket covering her head, and I could not see her face. I tried to check if her chest was rising, but could not tell.
“Lyssa, are you alright?” No answer.
The viscera in my stomach started having a cold feeling. I pulled the covers from her head. A chill went up my spine and a scream out of my mouth, loud enough to bring the rest of the staff running to Lyssa’s room.
My legs failed me and I fell on the floor.
Eros was the first one on the scene, and rapidly used his nursing scissors to cut the ligature.
Her eyes were still half opened, but I did not see light in them. Despite this, Eros started CPR.
After the paramedics had taken Lyssa to the ER and the code blue was cleared, Dr. Lenus asked to talk with me wanting to know what exactly was Lyssa’s mental state earlier.
“It is not my fault you know.”
“Isabela, I’m not accusing you of anything. I’m just trying to prevent future incidents. Maybe tomorrow we can talk."
“Talk with Eros, I have nothing to tell you.”
“That’s fine. If you need support the hospital offers counseling.”
“I’m fine. I don’t need to talk with you or anyone about it. I will write a report later.”
His blue eyes were fixed on me, he didn’t have much expression, neither anger, frustration, nor any kind of emotions. He always spoke in a monotone.
“If you change your mind let me know. Or you can call HR.”
 
I walked away from Dr. Lenus without giving him any answer. If Lyssa died, I knew that guilt would overwhelm me.
 
Life is so fragile. We should smile and hug everyone, every opportunity we have because we never know if we will have a second chance.
 
I went home that night with my heart literally broken into a million pieces.
Bakis was usually awake when I got home, but tonight he was asleep.
I stood by the end of the bed and looked at his chest rising and falling. He was alive!
 
Sleep was not my friend, it came in fragments. For once I actually prayed with intent. I prayed that Lyssa’s life would be spared, I knew that once her treatment was complete and the drugs were out her system she would think differently and wish to live.
It’s a fact that 50% of those who have been diagnosed with mental illness will attempt suicide at least once, and 10% will succeed.
 
That night I had nightmares. I dreamed that Bakis’ chest wasn’t rising, I shook him, I cried… Bakis… Bakis.. No No No…
I would wake up many times and check that he was in fact breathing. “He is alive, I would tell myself.”
I called Lone Peak in the middle of the night to check if they knew anything about Lyssa.
“Did she make it?”
“We don’t know Isabela. Try to get some rest.”
Most of the night I paced in my room, I looked at Bakis several times, oh  how I love him.
 
Next day, I went to work anxious to know if Lyssa had made it.
I purposely avoided passing by Dr. Lenus’ office. For some reason I was still irritated with him.
 
As we waited for change of shift, speculating if Lyssa was okay or not, some of the techs were saying that she was in the ICU, and some didn’t know a thing about it. As the clock hit two thirty a parade of professionals entered the room. Eros, along with Hector, our unit director, Kristine was there too, and she is the superintendent for the entire facility, several social workers came in, Dr. Lenus, Dr. Janus. What was going on? Something was not right.
Dr. Lenus started talking.
“We don’t have good news for you guys. Lyssa passed away last night. We want you to know that it wasn’t anyone’s fault. We are here to support you…”
All I could hear from this point on was “blah, blah, blah...
Tears were falling from my eyes down to my cheeks.
I got on the phone, and in tears I said to Bakis, “I just want to let you know how much I love you...”
Life would not be the same from that moment on.
